Section I. CLIMBING FUNDAMENTALS
A variety of refined techniques are used to climb different types of rock formations. The
foundation for all of these styles is the art of climbing. Climbing technique stresses
climbing with the weight centered over the feet, using the hands primarily for balance. It
can be thought of as a combination of the balanced movement required to walk a
tightrope and the technique used to ascend a ladder. No mountaineering equipment is
required; however, the climbing technique is also used in roped climbing.
6-1. ROUTE SELECTION
The experienced climber has learned to climb with the “eyes.” Even before getting on the
rock, the climber studies all possible routes, or “lines,” to the top looking for cracks,
ledges, nubbins, and other irregularities in the rock that will be used for footholds and
handholds, taking note of any larger ledges or benches for resting places. When picking
the line, he mentally climbs the route, rehearsing the step-by-step sequence of movements
that will be required to do the climb, ensuring himself that the route has an adequate
number of holds and the difficulty of the climb will be well within the limit of his ability.
6-2. TERRAIN SELECTION FOR TRAINING
Route selection for military climbing involves picking the easiest and quickest possible
line for all personnel to follow. However, climbing skill and experience can only be
FM 3-97.61
6-2
developed by increasing the length and difficulty of routes as training progresses. In the
training environment, beginning lessons in climbing should be performed CLOSE to the
ground on lower-angled rock with plenty of holds for the hands and feet. Personnel not
climbing can act as “spotters” for those climbing. In later lessons, a “top-rope” belay can
be used for safety, allowing the individual to increase the length and difficulty of the
climb under the protection of the climbing rope.
6-3. PREPARATION
In preparation for climbing, the boot soles should be dry and clean. A small stick can be
used to clean out dirt and small rocks that might be caught between the lugs of the boot
sole. If the soles are wet or damp, dry them off by stomping and rubbing the soles on
clean, dry rock. All jewelry should be removed from the fingers. Watches and bracelets
can interfere with hand placements and may become damaged if worn while climbing.
Helmets should be worn to protect the head from injury if an object, such as a rock or
climbing gear, falls from climbers above. Most climbing helmets are not designed to
provide protection from impact to the head if the wearer falls, but will provide a minimal
amount of protection if a climber comes in contact with the rock during climbing.
6-4. SPOTTING
Spotting is a technique used to add a level of safety to climbing without a rope. A second
man stands below and just outside of the climbers fall path and helps (spots) the climber
to land safely if he should fall. Spotting is only applicable if the climber is not going
above the spotters head on the rock. Beyond that height a roped climbing should be
conducted. If an individual climbs beyond the effective range of the spotter(s), he has
climbed TOO HIGH for his own safety. The duties of the spotter are to help prevent the
falling climber from impacting the head and or spine, help the climber land feet first, and
reduce the impact of a fall.
 CLIMBING TECHNIQUE
Climbing involves linking together a series of movements based on foot and hand
placement, weight shift, and movement. When this series of movements is combined
correctly, a smooth climbing technique results. This technique reduces excess force on
the limbs, helping to minimize fatigue. The basic principle is based on the five body parts
described here.
a. Five Body Parts. The five body parts used for climbing are the right hand, left
hand, right foot, left foot, and body (trunk). The basic principle to achieve smooth
climbing is to move only one of the five body parts at a time. The trunk is not moved in
conjunction with a foot or in conjunction with a hand, a hand is not moved in conjunction
with a foot, and so on. Following this simple technique forces both legs to do all the
lifting simultaneously.
b. Stance or Body Position. Body position is probably the single most important
element to good technique. A relaxed, comfortable stance is essential. (Figure 6-1 shows
a correct climbing stance, and Figure 6-2, page 6-4, shows an incorrect stance.) The body
should be in a near vertical or erect stance with the weight centered over the feet. Leaning
in towards the rock will cause the feet to push outward, away from the rock, resulting in a
loss of friction between the boot sole and rock surface. The legs are straight and the heels
are kept low to reduce fatigue. Bent legs and tense muscles tire quickly. If strained for too
long, tense muscles may vibrate uncontrollably. This vibration, known as “Elvis-ing” or
“sewing-machine leg” can be cured by straightening the leg, lowering the heel, or moving
on to a more restful position. The hands are used to maintain balance. Keeping the hands
between waist and shoulder level will reduce arm fatigue.
(1) Whenever possible, three points of contact are maintained with the rock. Proper
positioning of the hips and shoulders is critical. When using two footholds and one
handhold, the hips and shoulders should be centered over both feet. In most cases, as the
climbing progresses, the body is resting on one foot with two handholds for balance. The
hips and shoulders must be centered over the support foot to maintain balance, allowing
the “free” foot to maneuver.
(2) The angle or steepness of the rock also determines how far away from the rock
the hips and shoulders should be. On low-angle slopes, the hips are moved out away from
the rock to keep the body in balance with the weight over the feet. The shoulders can be
moved closer to the rock to reach handholds. On steep rock, the hips are pushed closer to
the rock. The shoulders are moved away from the rock by arching the back. The body is
still in balance over the feet and the eyes can see where the hands need to go. Sometimes,
when footholds are small, the hips are moved back to increase friction between the foot
and the rock. This is normally done on quick, intermediate holds. It should be avoided in
the rest position as it places more weight on the arms and hands. When weight must be
placed on handholds, the arms should be kept straight to reduce fatigue. Again, flexed
muscles tire quickly.
c. Climbing Sequence. The steps defined below provide a complete sequence of
events to move the entire body on the rock. These are the basic steps to follow for a
smooth climbing technique. Performing these steps in this exact order will not always be
necessary because the nature of the route will dictate the availability of hand and foot
placements. The basic steps are weight, shift, and movement (movement being either the
foot, hand, or body). (A typical climbing sequence is shown in Figure 6-3, pages 6-6
through 6-8.)
STEP ONE: Shift the weight from both feet to one foot. This will allow lifting of
one foot with no effect on the stance.
STEP TWO: Lift the unweighted foot and place it in a new location, within one to
two feet of the starting position, with no effect on body position or
balance (higher placement will result in a potentially higher lift for the
legs to make, creating more stress, and is called a high step) The trunk
does not move during foot movement.
STEP THREE: Shift the weight onto both feet. (Repeat steps 1 through 3 for
remaining foot.)
STEP FOUR: Lift the body into a new stance with both legs.
STEP FIVE: Move one hand to a new position between waist and head height.
During this movement, the trunk should be completely balanced in
position and the removed hand should have no effect on stability.
STEP SIX: Move the remaining hand as in Step 5.
Now the entire body is in a new position and ready to start the process again. Following
these steps will prevent lifting with the hands and arms, which are used to maintain
stance and balance. If both legs are bent, leg extension can be performed as soon as one
foot has been moved. Hand movements can be delayed until numerous foot movements
have been made, which not only creates shorter lifts with the legs, but may allow a better
choice for the next hand movements because the reach will have increased.