8-1. BASIC PRINCIPLES
Up scree or talus, through boulder fields or steep wooded mountainsides, over snow or
grass-covered slopes, the basic principles of mountain walking remain the same.
a. The soldier’s weight is centered directly over the feet at all times. He places his
foot flat on the ground to obtain as much (boot) sole-ground contact as possible. Then, he
places his foot on the uphill side of grass tussocks, small talus and other level spots to
avoid twisting the ankle and straining the Achilles tendon. He straightens the knee after
each step to allow for rest between steps, and takes moderate steps at a steady pace. An
angle of ascent or descent that is too steep is avoided, and any indentations in the slope
are used to advantage.
b. In addition to proper technique, pace is adapted to conditions. The mountaineer
sets a tempo, or number of steps per minute, according to the pace of the unit in which he
is moving. (Physical differences mean that the tempos of two people moving at the same
speed will not always be the same.) The soldier maintains tempo and compensates for
changes of slope or terrain by adjusting the length of his stride. Tempo, pace, and rhythm
are enhanced when an interval of three to five paces is kept between individuals. This
interval helps lessen the “accordion” effect of people at the end of the file who must
constantly stop and start.
c. The terrain, weather, and light conditions affect the rate of climb. The more
adverse the conditions, the slower the pace. Moving too fast, even under ideal conditions,
produces early fatigue, requires more rest halts, and results in loss of climbing time. A
soldier can only move as fast as his lungs and legs will allow. The trained, conditioned
and acclimatized soldier has greater endurance and moves more efficiently. Rest, good
nutrition and hydration, conditioning, acclimatization, proper training, and the will to
climb are key to successful mountain operations.
d. Breaks are kept to a minimum. When a moderate pace is set, the need for rest
halts decreases, the chance of personnel overheating is lessened, and a unit can cover a
given distance in a minimal time. If possible, rests should be taken on level ground
avoiding steeper inclines.
(1) During the first half-hour of movement an adjustment halt should be taken.
Soldiers will loosen or tighten bootlaces as needed, adjust packs and add or remove
appropriate layers of clothing.
(2) Following the first halt, a well-conditioned party may take a short rest every 1 to
1.5 hours. If possible, soldiers lean against a tree, rock, or hillside to relieve the shoulders
of pack weight, breathe deeply, hydrate, and snack on trail food. These halts are kept
short enough to avoid muscles stiffening (one to two minutes)
(3) Later in the march longer halts may be necessary due to fatigue or mission
requirements. At these halts soldiers should immediately put on additional clothing to
avoid chilling—it is much easier to keep a warm body warm than to warm up a cold one.
(4) After a climb, a good rest is needed to revive tired muscles.
e. The rest step is used for steep slopes, snowfields, and higher elevations. It
controls pace and limits fatigue by giving the lungs and legs a moment to recuperate
between steps. Pace is kept slow and rhythmic.
(1) After each step forward, the soldier pauses briefly, relaxing the muscles of the
forward leg while resting his entire bodyweight on the rear leg. The rear leg is kept
straight with the knee locked so that bone, not muscle, supports the weight.
(2) Breathing is synchronized with the rest step. The number of breaths per step will
change depending on the difficulty of the climb. Steeper slopes or higher elevations may
require several breaths per step. When the air thins at altitude it is especially important to
breathe deeply, using the “pressure breathing” technique. The soldier exhales strongly,
enabling an easier, deeper inhale.
(3) This slow, steady, halting rest step is more efficient than spurts of speed, which
are rapidly exhausting and require longer recovery.
f. Downhill walking uses less energy than uphill but is much harder on the body.
Stepping down can hammer the full bodyweight onto the feet and legs. Blisters and
blackened toenails, knee damage, and back pain may follow. To avoid these problems the
soldier should start by tightening bootlaces to ensure a snug fit (also keep toenails
trimmed). A ski pole, ice ax, or walking stick will help take some of the load and give
additional stability. (Refer to Chapter 11 for techniques and use of the ice ax.) Keep a
moderate pace and walk with knees flexed to absorb shock.
g. Side hill travel on any surface should be avoided whenever possible. Weighted
down with a rucksack, the soldier is vulnerable to twisted ankles, back injury, and loss of
balance. If side hill travel is necessary, try to switchback periodically, and use any lower
angle flat areas such as rocks, animal trails, and the ground above grass or brush clumps
to level off the route.
8-2. TECHNIQUES
Mountain walking techniques can be divided according to the general formation, surface,
and ground cover such as walking on hard ground, on snow slopes and grassy slopes,
through thick brush, and on scree and talus slopes.
a. Hard Ground. Hard ground is firmly compacted, rocky soil that does not give
way under the weight of a soldier’s step. It is most commonly found under mature forest
canopy, in low brush or heather, and areas where animals have beaten out multiple trails.
(1) When ascending, employ the rest step to rest the leg muscles. Steep slopes can be
traversed rather than climbed straight up. To turn at the end of each traverse, the soldier
should step off in the new direction with the uphill foot. This prevents crossing the feet
and possible loss of balance. While traversing, the full sole-to-ground principle is
accomplished by rolling the ankle downhill on each step. For small stretches the
herringbone step may be used—ascending straight up a slope with toes pointed out. A
normal progression, as the slope steepens, would be from walking straight up, to a
herringbone step, and then to a traverse on the steeper areas.
(2) Descending is best done by walking straight down the slope without traversing.
The soldier keeps his back straight and bends at the knees to absorb the shock of each
step. Body weight is kept directly over the feet and the full boot sole is placed on the
ground with each step. Walking with a slight forward lean and with the feet in a normal
position make the descent easier.
b. Snow Slopes. Snow-covered terrain can be encountered throughout the year
above 1,500 meters in many mountainous areas. Talus and brush may be covered by
hardened snowfields, streams made crossable with snowbridges. The techniques for
ascending and descending moderate snow slopes are similar to walking on hard ground
with some exceptions.
(1) Diagonal Traverse Technique. The diagonal traverse is the most efficient means
to ascend snow. In conjunction with the ice ax it provides balance and safety for the
soldier. This technique is a two-step sequence. The soldier performs a basic rest step,
placing the leading (uphill) foot above and in front of the trailing (downhill) foot, and
weighting the trail leg. This is the in-balance position. The ice ax, held in the uphill hand,
is placed in the snow above and to the front. The soldier shifts his weight to the leading
(uphill) leg and brings the unweighted trail (downhill) foot ahead of the uphill foot. He
shifts weight to the forward (downhill) leg and then moves the uphill foot up and places it
out ahead of the trail foot, returning to the in-balance position. At this point the ax is
moved forward in preparation for the next step.
(2) Step Kicking. Step kicking is a basic technique used when crampons are not
worn. It is best used on moderate slopes when the snow is soft enough to leave clear
footprints. On softer snow the soldier swings his foot into the snow, allowing the leg’s
weight and momentum to carve the step. Fully laden soldiers will need to kick steps,
which take half of the boot. The steps should be angled slightly into the slope for added
security. Succeeding climbers will follow directly in the steps of the trailbreaker, each
one improving the step as he ascends. Harder snow requires more effort to kick steps, and
they will not be as secure. The soldier may need to slice the step with the side of his boot
and use the diagonal technique to ascend.
(3) Descending Snow. If the snow is soft and the slope gentle, simply walk straight
down. Harder snow or steeper slopes call for the plunge step, which must be done in a
positive, aggressive manner. The soldier faces out, steps off, and plants his foot solidly,
driving the heel into the snow while keeping his leg straight. He shifts his weight to the
new foot plant and continues down with the other foot. On steeper terrain it may be
necessary to squat on the weighted leg when setting the plunge step. The upper body
should be kept erect or canted slightly forward.
(4) Tips on Snow Travel. The following are tips for travelling on snow.
(a) Often the best descent is on a different route than the ascent. When looking for a
firmer travel surface, watch for dirty snow—this absorbs more heat and thus hardens
faster than clean snow.
(b) In the Northern Hemisphere, slopes with southern and western exposures set up
earlier in the season and quicker after storms, but are more prone to avalanches in the
spring. These slopes generally provide firm surfaces while northern and eastern
exposures remain unconsolidated.
(c) Travel late at night or early in the morning is best if daytime temperatures are
above freezing and the sun heats the slopes. The night’s cold hardens the snow surface
(d) Avoid walking on snow next to logs, trees, and rocks as the subsurface snow has
melted away creating hidden traps.
c. Grassy Slopes. Grassy slopes are usually composed of small tussocks of growth
rather than one continuous field.
(1) When ascending, step on the upper side of each hummock or tussock, where the
ground is more level.
(2) When descending a grassy slope, the traverse technique should be used because of
the uneven nature of the ground. A climber can easily build up too much speed and fall if
a direct descent is tried. The hop-skip step can be useful on this type of slope. In this
technique, the lower leg takes all of the weight, and the upper leg is used only for
balance. When traversing, the climber’s uphill foot points in the direction of travel. The
downhill foot points about 45 degrees off the direction of travel (downhill). This
maintains maximum sole contact and prevents possible downhill ankle roll-out.
Note: Wet grass can be extremely slippery; the soldier must be aware of ground cover
conditions.
d. Thick Brush. For the military mountaineer, brush is both a help and a hindrance.
Brush-filled gullies can provide routes and rally points concealed from observation; on
the other hand steep brushy terrain is hazardous to negotiate. Cliffs and steep ravines are
hidden traps, and blow downs and thickets can obstruct travel as much as manmade
obstacles. When brush must be negotiated take the most direct route across the obstacle;
look for downed timber to use as raised paths through the obstacle; or create a tunnel
through the obstacle by prying the brush apart, standing on lower branches and using
upper limbs for support.
e. Scree Slopes. Slopes composed of the smallest rocks are called scree slopes.
Scree varies in size from the smallest gravel to about the size of a man’s fist.
(1) Ascending scree slopes is difficult and tiring and should be avoided, if possible.
All principles of ascending hard ground and snow apply, but each step is carefully chosen
so that the foot does not slide down when weighted. This is done by kicking in with the
toe of the upper foot (similar to step-kicking in snow) so that a step is formed in the loose
scree. After determining that the step is stable, weight is transferred to the upper leg, the
soldier then steps up and repeats the process with the lower foot.
(2) The best method for descending scree slopes is to come straight down the slope
using a short shuffling step with the knees bent, back straight, feet pointed downhill, and
heels dug in. When several climbers descend a scree slope together, they should be as
close together as possible (one behind the other at single arm interval) to prevent injury
from dislodged rocks. Avoid running down scree as this can cause a loss of control.
When the bottom of the slope (or run out zone) cannot be seen, use caution because dropoffs may be encountered.
(3) Scree slopes can be traversed using the ice ax as a third point of contact. Always
keep the ax on the uphill side. When the herringbone or diagonal method is used to
ascend scree, the ax can be used placing both hands on the top and driving the spike into
the scree slope above the climber. The climber uses the ax for balance as he moves up to
it, and then repeats the process.
f. Talus Slopes. Talus slopes are composed of rocks larger than a man’s fist. When
walking in talus, ascending or descending, climbers should always step on the uphill side
of rocks and stay alert for movement underfoot. Disturbing unstable talus can cause
rockslides. Climbers must stay in close columns while walking through talus so that
dislodged rocks do not reach dangerous speeds before reaching lower soldiers. To
prevent rock fall injuries, avoid traversing below other climbers. All other basics of
mountain walking apply.
8-3. SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS
The mountain walking techniques presented here are designed to reduce the hazards of
rock fall and loss of control leading to a fall. Carelessness can cause the failure of the
best-planned missions.
a. Whenever a rock is kicked loose, the warning, “Rock!” is shouted immediately.
Personnel near the bottom of the cliff immediately lean into the cliff to reduce their
exposure, and do not look up. Personnel more than 3 meters away from the bottom of the
cliff may look up to determine where the rock is heading and seek cover behind an
obstacle. Lacking cover, personnel should anticipate which way the rock is falling and
move out of its path to the left or right.
b. If a soldier slips or stumbles on sloping terrain (hard ground, grass, snow, or
scree) he must immediately self-arrest, digging into the slope with hands, elbows, knees
and toes. If he falls backwards and rolls over he must immediately try to turn over onto
his stomach with his legs downhill and self-arrest with hands and toes.
c. When traveling through steep terrain, soldiers should be trained in the use of the
ice ax for self-arrest. The ax can be used to arrest a fall on solid ground, grass and scree
as well as snow. It may also be used as a third point of contact on difficult terrain. If not
in use the ice ax is carried in or on the rucksack with its head down and secured.
8-4. NAVIGATION
Navigation is the process of determining one’s present position, the location of a target
objective, and selecting and following a route between these two points. Navigation
consists of three distinct stages: orientation, navigation, and route finding.
• Orientation is simply figuring out exactly where one is. The use of the map,
compass and identifiable terrain features, assisted by an altimeter and GPS, is
the foundation of good navigation.
• Navigation includes the determination of the objective’s location and the
direction from the soldier’s starting point to the objective. The same skills and
equipment used in orientation are essential for good navigation.
• Route finding is picking the best line of travel that matches the equipment and
capabilities of the team. Good route finding incorporates a comprehensive
awareness of terrain, a solid base of mountaineering experience, good
judgement and sound tactical instincts.
a. Compasses. The magnetic compass is the simplest and most widely used
instrument for measuring directions and angles in the mountains. The lensatic compass is
most commonly used in the military and can be employed in a variety of ways for either
day or night navigation.
b. Altimeters. The altimeter is a vital piece of navigational equipment that can save
valuable time in determining position through elevation.
(1) The standard altimeter is a modified barometer. A barometer is an instrument that
measures the weight of a column of air above itself and displays the result on a scale
marked in units of pressure, usually inches of mercury, millimeters of mercury, or
millibars. Since air pressure drops uniformly as elevation is gained, it can be used to read
altitude by means of the altimeter’s scale, marked in feet or meters of elevation above sea
level. By measuring air pressure, the altimeter/barometer gives the navigator new
techniques for position finding, route planning, checking progress and terrain
identification. It also gives the navigator valuable weather information specific to his
immediate location.
(2) Changes in the weather are usually accompanied by air pressure changes, which
are reflected in the altimeter. As the air pressure drops due to the approach of inclement
weather for instance, the displayed elevation will rise by a corresponding amount. This
means that a barometric pressure change of one inch of mercury equals roughly 1,000
feet of elevation. If the altimeter displays an elevation gain of 300 feet, a loss of
barometric pressure of .3 inches has occurred, and bad weather should be expected.
(3) Altimeters come in two types: wrist-mounted digital altimeters and analog
altimeters, usually attached to a cord.
(4) Because the altimeter is sensitive to changes in air pressure it must be recalibrated
whenever a point of known elevation (summits, saddles, stream-trail intersections, survey
monuments, and so forth) is reached. This is especially important when weather fronts
are moving rapidly through the area.
(5) The altimeter may expand or contract because of changes in temperature. This can
result in faulty elevation readings. Although some altimeters are temperaturecompensated, rapid ascents or descents sometime overcome the adjustment, causing them
to give poor readings.
(6) Keep the altimeter at a constant temperature. This is best accomplished by storing
the altimeter (analog) in a pocket or on a cord around the neck, or on the wrist under the
parka and hand gear (digital).
(7) Even though altimeters can be precise they are affected by both pressure and
temperature changes and should be monitored carefully. The soldier should become
familiar with the specific altimeter he employs and understand its capabilities and
limitations.
c. Global Positioning System. The GPS is a space-based, global, all-weather,
continuously available radio positioning navigation system. It is highly accurate in
determining position location derived from a satellite constellation system. It can
determine the latitude, longitude and elevation of the individual user. Location
information is also displayed in military grid coordinates.
(1) The GPS provides precise steering information as well as position locations. The
receiver can accept many checkpoints entered in any coordinate system by the user and
convert them to the desired coordinate system. The user then calls up the desired
checkpoint and the receiver will display direction and distance to the checkpoint. It can
also compute travel time to the next checkpoint.
(2) Because the GPS does not need visible landmarks to operate, it can provide
position (accurate up to 16 meters) in whiteouts or on featureless terrain. It also does not
compound navigational errors as compass use can.
(3) During route planning, after choosing critical checkpoints, start point and
objective, enter their coordinates as way points. The best use of the GPS is to verify these
as they are reached, as a backup to terrain association and compass navigation.
(4) Since the 21-satellite constellation is not yet complete, coverage may be limited to
specific hours of the day in certain areas of the world. The GPS navigational signals are
similar to light rays, so anything that blocks light will reduce or block the effectiveness of
the signals. The more unobstructed the view of the sky, the better the system performs.
Although the GPS can be used in any terrain, it is performs best in more open areas such
as the desert.
(5) Because the GPS requires horizon to horizon views for good satellite reception its
use can be limited in the mountains. Canyons, deep valleys, saddles, and steep
mountainsides are all problematic spots to use for shots. Ridgelines, spurs, summits, open
valleys, or plateaus are better.
(6) When using GPS in regions with questionable surveying and mapping products,
operational datum of the local maps must be reconciled with the datum used in
navigational and targeting systems. Identify the spheroid and datum information on the
pertinent map sheets and then check that the GPS receiver has the compatible datum
loaded. If not then you must contact the S2 for updated datum or maps. Otherwise, the
GPS will show different locations than those on the map.
(7) Extremely cold temperatures (-4 degrees F and below) and high elevations will
adversely affect the operation of the GPS, due to the freezing of the batteries and the
LCD screen. Battery life and overall performance can be improved by placing the GPS
inside the parka or coat.
d. Navigation Techniques. The choice of movement technique often determines the
route and navigational technique. For navigation, three techniques can be used: dead
reckoning, terrain association, or altimeter navigation. The three are not mutually
exclusive and are normally used together, with one chosen as the primary technique. The
GPS can be used to supplement these techniques, but due to the problems associated with
the restricted line of sight in the mountains, it should not be used as the main technique.
(1) Dead Reckoning. Because of the complex nature of mountainous terrain, dead
reckoning is usually of limited value on most movements. The compass is generally
employed more to support terrain association and to orient the map, than as a primary
navigational aid. The main exception is during periods of limited visibility on featureless
terrain. Heavy fog, snowy or whiteout conditions on a snowfield, glacier, large plateau or
valley floor all would call for dead reckoning as a primary navigational technique.
(2) Terrain Association. The standard terrain association techniques all apply.
Handrails, checkpoints, catching features, navigational corridors, boxing-in areas, and
attack points are all used. When a small objective lies near or on an easily identifiable
feature, that feature becomes an expanded objective. This simplifies the navigational
problem by giving a large feature to navigate to first. The altimeter may finalize the
search for the objective by identification through elevation. Rough compass headings are
used to establish a general direction to the next checkpoint; used when the checkpoint
headed toward is a linear feature, and not a precise point. The shape, orientation, size,
elevation, slope (SOSES) strategy is especially valuable in mountain terrain association
and should be practiced extensively (FM 3-25.26).
(a) After extensive study of the map and all available sources of information it helps
to create a mental image of the route. This will enable the navigator to make the terrain
work in his favor. Avoid brush for speed and ease of movement; the military crest of
spurs and ridgelines generally provides the best route while providing terrain masking
effects. When clear cut, burned-over, or large avalanche slide areas are encountered, it
may be necessary to box or contour around them as they may be full of slash or brushy
second-growth small trees. Old-growth forest provides the easiest travel.
(b) The following situations will result in objects appearing closer than they
actually are:
• When most of the object is visible and offers a clear outline.
• When you are looking across a partially cleared depression.
• When looking down a straight, open road or track.
• When looking over a smooth, uniform surface, such as snow, water, or desert.
• When the light is bright and the sun is shining from behind the observer.
• When the object is in sharp contrast to the background.
• When seen in the clear air of high altitude.
• When looking down from high ground to low ground.
(c) The following situations will result in objects appearing farther away than they
actually are:
• When only part of the object is seen or it is small in relation to its
surroundings.
• When you are looking across an exposed depression.
• When looking up from low ground to high ground.
• When your vision is narrowly confined.
• When the light is poor, such as dawn, dusk, or low visibility weather; or when
the sun is in your eyes, but not behind the object being viewed.
• When the object blends into the background.
(2) Altimeter Navigation. Altimeters provide assistance to the navigator in several
ways. They aid in orientation, in computing rates of ascent or descent, in resection, and in
weather prediction.
(a) When moving along any linear feature such as a ridge, watercourse, or trail which
is shown on the map, check the altimeter. The point where the indicated elevation contour
crosses that feature is your location.
(b) The navigator frequently finds it necessary to determine his position through the
use of resection. A modified resection can be performed by shooting an azimuth to a
known, clearly visible summit or similar feature and then plotting the back azimuth on
the map. By determining your present elevation and finding where that particular contour
crosses the back azimuth you should locate your position. This can be difficult when in
low ground, as mountain summits can rarely be clearly seen from valley floors. In
addition, most mountaintops are so large that there is usually no specific point to shoot at.
In this case, the soldier should take multiple azimuths to known features. If he is located
on a good linear feature he will have a decent idea of where he is. The altimeter can be
used to verify elevation and establish a notional linear feature—a contour line. The point
where the resecting back azimuths cross the contour line is the navigator’s location.
(c) Using the altimeter to calculate rates of ascent can help in sound decision-making.
Rates of travel, along with weather conditions, light conditions (time of day), and the
physical condition of the team, are all key variables that can influence the success or
failure of the mission.
(d) Altimeters can be used as barometers to assist in weather prediction.
e. Approach Observations. Watch the mountain during the approach march,
studying it for climbing routes. Distant views can reveal large-scale patterns of ridges,
cliffs, snowfields and glaciers. General angles of the large rock masses can be seen from
afar.
(1) Closer viewing displays these patterns and angles on a smaller scale. Fault lines,
gross bedding planes of rock, cliff bands, and crevasse zones become visible. Snowy or
vegetated ledge systems appear. Weaknesses in the mountain walls, such as couloirs or
gullies, may present themselves.
(2) Most of these features repeat themselves at increasingly finer levels, as they are
generally derived from the overall structure of the particular mountain group. A basic
knowledge of mountain geology, combined with the specific geological background of
the operational area, pays off in more efficient travel.
f. Natural Indicators of Direction in the Northern Hemisphere. Southern slopes
are sunnier and drier than northern slopes, with sparser or different types of vegetation.
Northern slopes can be snowier and, because of more intense glaciation in past ages, are
often steeper.
Note: Opposite rules apply in the Southern Hemisphere.
g. Winter Route Selection. The following must be considered when selecting a
route in the winter.
(1) Conduct a thorough map reconnaissance considering the weather, individual ski
abilities, avalanche danger, vegetation, water features, terrain relief, and the size of the
unit.
(2) Weather conditions will affect the chosen route. During calm weather, your rate
of movement will be significantly faster than during periods of inclement weather.
(3) Individual ski abilities will affect your rate of movement, constrain your choice of
terrain, and impact on your route choices.
(4) Avalanche danger zones must be identified by map review and data gathered
during route planning. During movement, snow pits, shovel tests, and ski shear tests must
be conducted prior to crossing an avalanche danger zone. Bottom line: avoid avalanche
danger areas. If you must cross one, cross above the starting zone or below the
run-out zone.
(5) Vegetation can work for you or against you. Thickly forested areas usually have a
deep snow pack. For weaker skiers, forested areas are full of potentially dangerous
obstacles. On slopes with an angle of 30 to 45 degrees that are sparsely vegetated an
avalanche danger is still present. If the weather turns bad, forested areas provide welcome
relief from wind and blowing snow.
(6) Water features provide valuable navigation aids. Under deep snow pack small
creeks and ponds may be hard to locate. Large frozen lakes and rivers can provide
excellent means of increasing your rate of march.
(7) During ski movements, efficient use of terrain will greatly improve morale and
reduce fatigue. While traveling in mountainous terrain, do not needlessly give up
elevation gained. Maintain a steady climb rate and avoid over exertion. Avoid north, east,
and south facing slopes when the avalanche danger is high. Avoid cornices and be aware
of their probable and improbable fracture lines. Weather and tactical situation permitting,
travel on the windward side of ridgelines. If weak skiers are in the group, stay away from
restrictive terrain with sheer drop-offs. When touring use climbing skins to maintain
control and lessen lost time per hour due to individuals falling.
(8) The following are additional hints for navigation in snowy conditions:
• Keep the compass warm.
• If no terrain features exist for steering marks, use your back azimuth and
tracks to maintain course.
• Limit steering marks to shorter distances since visibility can change quickly.
• Never take azimuths near metallic objects. Hold the compass far enough from
your weapon, ice ax, and so on to get accurate readings.
• Make frequent compass checks.
• Preset azimuths on your compass.
• Use a steady, unshifting wind to aid you in maintaining course.
h. Problems. The following conditions and characteristics of cold weather and
mountainous regions make accurate navigation difficult.
(1) In winter, short hours of daylight, fog, snowfall, blizzards, whiteouts, and drifting
snow, especially above tree line, drastically limit visibility. At times, an overcast sky and
snow-covered terrain create a phenomenon called flat light, which makes recognition of
irregularities in the terrain extremely difficult.
(2) Heavy snow may completely cover existing tracks, trails, outlines of small lakes
and similar landmarks. Because the appearance of the terrain is quite different in winter
from that in summer, particular attention must be paid to identifying landmarks, both on
the ground and from aerial photographs.
(3) Magnetic disturbances, caused by large ore deposits, are frequently encountered
and make magnetic compass readings difficult and sometimes unreliable.
(4) Handling maps, compasses, and other navigation instruments in low temperatures
with bare hands is difficult. Removing hand wear may only be possible for short periods.
(5) Keeping count of pace is extremely difficult in winter and mountain
environments. Thick vegetation and rough, steep slopes hamper attempts at accurate pace
counts. The most reliable method is the use of a 50-meter long piece of field wire or rope.
8-5. ROUTE PLANNING
Proper route planning can make the difference between success and failure on long
mountain movements. Careful map reconnaissance, knowledge of the enemy situation,
terrain analysis of the operational area, and an accurate assessment of the unit’s
capabilities are all key parts of the planning process.
a. Map Reconnaissance. Topographic maps provide the primary source of
information concerning the area of operations. A 1:25,000 map depicts greater detail than
a 1:50,000 map and should be used whenever possible. Because examination of the
micro-terrain is so important for mountain operations, even larger scale maps are
desirable. Civilian 1:12,000 maps can be used if available. Aerial, oblique angle,
photographs give details not always shown on maps (crags and overhangs). Sketch maps
supplement other sources of information but should not be relied on for accuracy since
they are seldom drawn to scale. Along with sketch maps, verbal descriptions,
documented information gathered from units previously in the area, or published sources
such as alpine journals or climbing guides may help. Forest service and logging and
mining company maps provide additional information, often showing the most recent
changes to logging trails and mining access roads. Standard military topographic maps
are generally accurate graphic depictions of the operational area.
(1) When conducting a map reconnaissance, pay close attention to the marginal
information. Mountain-specific terrain features may be directly addressed in the legend.
In addition, such facilities as ski lifts, cable and tramways are often found. Check the
datum descriptor (for foreign maps) to ensure compatibility with entered datum in GPS
units. Along with the standard topographic map color scheme, there are some commonly
seen applications for mountainous terrain. White with blue contours indicates glaciers or
permanent snowfields. The outline of the snow or ice is shown by dashed blue lines while
their contour lines are solid blue. High ice cliffs which are equal to or exceed the contour
interval will be shown. Low ice cliffs and ice caves may be indicated if they provide local
landmarks. Brown contour lines on white mean dry areas without significant forest cover.
Areas above tree line, clear cuts, rock or avalanche slide paths and meadows are all
possible. Study the surrounding terrain and the legend for other clues. An important point
to remember is that thick brush in small gullies and streambeds may not be depicted by
green, but should still be expected.
(2) Obstacles, such as rivers and gorges, will require technical equipment to cross if
bridges are not present. Fords and river crossing sites should be identified. Due to the
potential for hazardous weather conditions, potential bivouac sites are noted on the map.
Ruins, barns, sheds and terrain-protected hollows are all possible bivouac sites. Danger
areas in the mountains; isolated farms and hamlets, bridges, roads, trails, and large open
areas above tree line, are factored in, and plans made to avoid them. Use of terrainmasking becomes essential because of the extended visibility offered by enemy
observation points on the dominant high ground.
(3) Helicopter support, weather permitting, requires identification of tentative landing
zones for insertions, extractions, resupply and medevac. The confined nature of mountain
travel means that crucial passes become significant chokepoints and planners should
designate overwatches/surveillance positions beforehand. Alternate routes should be
chosen with weather imposed obstacles in mind: spring flood or afternoon snowmelt
turns small streams into turbulent, impassable torrents. Avalanche danger prohibits travel
on certain slopes or valley floors.
b. Enemy Situation. Route selection should only be done after reviewing all
available information about the friendly and enemy situation.—Is the enemy force on his
own ground? Are they accustomed to the terrain and the weather? Are they trained
mountain troops with specialized equipment?—Only after answering these and other
questions can an effective route plan be completed. If the enemy force is better prepared
to maneuver in the mountains, they have a marked advantage, and route selection must be
scrutinized.
c. Analysis of the Operational Area. Not all mountainous terrain is created equal
and not all movement plans have the same expectation of success. Planners must
undertake a thorough analysis of the general terrain to be crossed, including the geology,
mountain structure and forms, and ground cover.
(1) Heavily glaciated granite mountains pose different problems than does
river-carved terrain. The U-shaped valley bulldozed out by a glacier forces maneuver
elements down to the valley floor or up to the ridge tops, while the water-cut V-shape of
river valleys allows movement throughout the compartment.
(2) Routes through granite rock (long cracks, good friction; use of pitons, chocks and
camming units) will call for different equipment and technique than that used for steep
limestone (pockets, smooth rock; bolts, camming units).
(3) Operations above tree line in temperate climates or in the brushy zone of arid
mountains means that material for suspension traverse A-frames must be packed. The
thick brush and krummholtz mats of subalpine zones and temperate forested mountains
can create obstacles that must be bypassed.
(4) Heavy spruce/fir tangles slow progress to a crawl, therefore planners should
ensure routes do not blindly traverse these zones.
d. Unit Assessment. When assessing unit movement capabilities the key indices are
training and conditioning levels. Soldiers who have received basic military mountaineer
training, who know how to move through rough terrain, and who have been hardened
with training hikes through the mountains, will perform better than troops without this
background.
e. Time-Distance Formulas. Computing march rates in the mountains is extremely
difficult, especially when there is snow cover. The following rates are listed as a guide
(Table 8-1). Rates are given for movement over flat or gently rolling terrain for
individuals carrying a rifle and loaded rucksack.
(3) Individual loads also affect march rates. Combined soldier loads that exceed 50
pounds per man can be expected to slow movement significantly in mountainous terrain.
Given the increased weight of extra ammunition for crew-served weapons, basic
mountaineering gear, and clothing for mountain travel, it becomes obvious that soldiers
will be carrying weights well in excess of that 50-pound limit. Units should conduct
cross-country movements in the mountains with the expected rucksack and LCE weights
in order to obtain accurate, realistic rates of march.
(4) In the harsh environment of the mountains, helicopter support cannot be relied on.
The process of transporting extra equipment and sustainment supplies will result in vastly
increased movement times. The heavier loads will exhaust soldiers mentally and
physically. Tactical movements, such as patrolling or deliberate assaults, should take this
into account.
8-6. ROUTE SELECTION
Many variables affect the selection of the proper route. The following guidelines apply to
all situations.
a. Select a Current Map. Check the date of the map for an indication of the
reliability of the map in depicting vegetation, clearings, roads, and trails accurately. The
leader should use all the latest topographic data he can find.
b. Gather Intelligence Information. The most important consideration in every
leader’s mind when plotting a movement is “where is the enemy?” The latest intelligence
reports are essential. Additionally, weather reports, snow condition reports, avalanche
probability, aerial photos, and any past or recent history of operations in the area may be
of help.
c. Select a Route. Identify the starting point and determine the movement objective.
Plot start and end points. Carefully scrutinize the area in between and begin to select the
route. Consider the following:
(1) Trafficability. This includes degree of slopes, vegetation, width of trails, snow
depth, avalanche probability, and the likelihood of crevasses.
(2) Time-Distance Formula. Time allotted and distance to be covered must be
considered.
(3) Required Equipment. Carry enough equipment to move along the route and to
survive if an extended stay becomes necessary. Do not plan a route beyond the means of
your equipment.
(4) Location of Enemy. Plan a route that allows maximum use of the masking effect
of the terrain. Avoid danger areas or areas of recent enemy activity unless required by the
mission. Use vegetation to mask your movement if possible (especially coniferous
forests). Avoid silhouetting on ridgelines.
(5) Communications. Communications will be severely limited in the mountains.
Dead spaces or communications holes are common. Use all available information and
plan accordingly.
(6) Conditions/Capabilities of Unit. The unit must be able to negotiate the route
chosen. Take into consideration their present health, as well as their training level when
selecting your intended route.
(7) Checkpoints/Control Points. When plotting a route on the map, utilize prominent
terrain features on either side of the route as checkpoints. Ensure that when you select
your checkpoints they are visually significant (elevation) and that they are easily
identifiable. Avoid the use of manmade features as checkpoints due to their unreliability
and lack of permanence. Select features that are unique to the area.